---
title: "Investors Are Destroying Crypto"
date: 2023-12-14T12:51:49+05:30
draft: false
tags: ["tech", "crypto"]
---

I don't know why I'm writing this now. Just throwing out my opinions.

After the 2008 financial crisis, some people decided to create a new currency
that's not in control of government or any other central authority. The currency
is controlled by the people who use it. They name that currency Bitcoin. 

This currency used a genius mechanism called blockchain to create digital
scarcity, which is exactly what a currency needs. A currency should be a limited
resource. If anyone can create currency units, then it can't hold any value. So
the main idea behind Bitcoin is genius.  It has many flaws though. Scalability,
privacy etc are widely discussed. Other problem I see with it is, there's no way
to control money flow. Government controlled money has its own mechanisms to
deal with inflation/deflation and other economic problems. Print money to fight
deflation, increase interest rates to fight inflation etc. But Bitcoin only have
a pre-determined amount of money in circulation.

Even though bitcoin has above said problems, the core idea behind it, a user
controlled currency, is a great idea. No central authority to impose rules on
users, but if all users decide to change they can. It's the democracy at its
best.

Because I'm going to only discuss about this core philosophy, in crypto,
individual currency names such as BTC or ETH doesn't matter. Also, ignore the
implementation details of each currency. I'm just going to say why crypto in its
current state will never going to succeed as a currency. I'll describe how
greedy investors destroyed crypto.

<div class="hr"></div>

Many people say government issued money is solely based of trust, the trust
people put on the government. When governemt pring a 100LKR note and say it
values 100LKR, people believe it. 

This idea is mentioned as a way to convince people why crypto is better than
government issued money. Ironically, this story is same for crypto too. Crypto
has that value because people believe it has that value. Even for a limited
resource like gold, other than being attractive due to its rareness and shiny
nature, it has no use other than for electronics and chemical experiments.

The saying that "government issued money is based on trust" is not a completely
valid statement. Yes, it's true that when I see a 100LKR note, I believe it has
a value of, well, 100LKR. But what is that value? What is 100LKR. Just like meters
and kilograms, LKR is just a unit and 100 is how much of that unit I have.

So, what gives that unit a value? It's the economy made by people using that
currency. 

### How currency get its value

Think of a small economy in which the only commodities dealing with
are bread and pencils.  Only people living here are a baker and a pencil maker.
The baker produce 10 breads per day, but the pencil maker only makes 1.  

So naturally, when baker keeps a bread for himself, 10 breads are worth 1 pencil.

Now imagine they started using money. Now a pencil is worth 100LKR. So automatically,
10 breads are worth 100LKR. So, 1 bread is worth 10LKR. 

Now imagin a new pensil maker comes to the town and starts making 19 pencils per
day.  Hence the total pencil production per day is 20. Now, the transaction of
10 breads for 20 pencils is the value of 100LKR. So now, still a bread cost
10LKR but a pencil is now only 5LKR. All of a sudden with a 100LKR note, baker
can afford more pencils. Deflation!

Notice here that there was no government or money controlling body. No once said
a pencil is this worth and a bread is this worth (I set the initial price, but
then value of LKR adjusted itself to the economy).

That's why the statement "Government issued currency is based on trust" is not
completely true. It's not false either. It's just a half truth.

**A single unit of government issued currency represents a tiny fraction of the
entire economy that currency is used in.** 

Now let's see how crypto works.

### How crypto get its value

Let's say we have a crypto currency called ABC. Originally, authors wanted to
make this a replacement to government issued currency. They managed to get a fan
base using this currency for fun.

But one day, let's called it the ABC Pizza day, a pizza shop accepted 10,000 ABC
coins for a single pizza. This is a huge deal. From now on, ABC is not just a
hobby currency. Now 1 ABC is worth 0.0001 pizza. The day a ABC user bought pizza
with ABC, ABC became a real currency because it got a place in the economy.

But then, some greedy investors saw this. They thought, oh wow, if every pizza
shop starts accepting ABC, value of ABC coin goes up because the supply of ABC
currency is capped to 21 million. 

So they started buying ABC coins planning to sell when the price goes up.
Because they asked for a huge amount of ABC coins but the supply of ABC coins is
limited, the price of ABC coins went up. Other greedy investors saw the price
going up and started buying so they can sell later and make some profit.

What never happened is, pizza shops or any other shop never started accepting
ABC coins. But somehow, price is going up. How?

If ABC is not backed by the pizza economy or any other economy, then from which
the value of ABC is backed by? Well, it's **Hope**. Hope that one day ABC price 
will go to the moon. 

Will that ever happen? Maybe ABC would one day worth a lot, but it's not a
constant price hike. It's a bubble. It will burst. If an investor sells his ABC
coins to someone else for a profit, the new investor is buying it for the same
reason, sell it for a profit. 

But these investors are living in a real economy. There's a level this real
economy can bear this bubble. When it reaches that level, the bubble will burst.
When new investors stop coming, when people don't buy into this "*hope*" thing,
the price will collapse.

Would ABC ever have a real economic value? Might be not. Think of a
businessman's perspective. Do you want to accept a currency which is just backed
by *hope* instead of real assets and services? For most people, answer is no.
So, it is very less likely that the ABC currency will ever have a real economic
value.

### Gambling vs Investing

> When you invest, you buy a physical asset that can produce goods or services.
> When you gamble, you're just looking for suckers. As a seasoned poker player,
> I can tell you that everyone thinks they're a graet player when they're on a
> winning streak.
>
> -- <cite>@ilya475 (youtube comment)</cite>

Above comments sums up the current state of crypto investing. People are not
buying to something backed by real world value such as stocks. They are buying
into the hope.  If you make profit by selling your crypto, it's just because you
found a looser. May be that other guy is not the looser, but eventually someone
will be. That original investor got his profit from that "someone," but that
"someone" unfortunately could not recover even the initial investment because
the bubble bursted. 

### Don't destroy crypto please

I'm not saying crypto is bad. I'm saying the investors are destroying crypto.

See how in the earlier example the ABC coin started to gain value after a pizza
shop accepted it. That's how crypto should gain value. Then ABC coin got
destroyed becaused some greedy investors stock pile ABC coins (They call it
HODL) and falsely inflated the price. Now ABC will never ever be a real
currency. 

Is there any similarity between BTC and ABC? Up to you to decide.

I think investors broke the popular currencies like BTC and ETH. From my very
little knowledge, I think the only currency that's not broken is Nano. Nano
managed to burst the bubble and survive. The big investors brought into Nano
lost. Now a nano coin only worth around a dollar. After the big burst, no
investor is really buying into nano. But you know who's buying? The real users
of Nano. Mostly gamers to buy in game items. Nano is acting like a currency now.

I think monero also would survive the fight against greedy crypto investors.
However to succeed, it needs to have inflation/deflation controlling mechanisms.

In the bread and pencil example, price of pencils went down. If another baker 
comes to the town, price of breads will also go down. This is deflation. If this
is a developing towm, this will happen constantly. Then people get the idea that
this town's currency will worth more tomorrow than today. So they will not
spend.

Hence, the government of the town will print more money to fight against
people's greedy thoughts of deflation. This will keep the price of bread and
pencils the same no matter how many bakers and pencil makers come to the town. 

Fighting inflation is harder than that. The only ways my stupid brain knows as
of now is to increase interest rates.

In conclusion, if a crypto have proper mechanisms to fight inflation and
also, "deflation", then investors won't put their money into it. So it will be
safe from greedy investors.

So as far as I see, if someone can fill the research gap of fighting deflation
and inflation in crypto in a DeFi manner, that day, crypto will be a real.

### Conclusion

As of now, crypto is heavily suffering from deflation. Solving deflation is easy
as printing more money. When that happens, fighting inflation is the challenge.
Also, doing this in a decentralized and automated manner is the real challenge.

These challenges are not yet solved.

For now, we have crypto destroyed by investors, like BTC and also crypto like Nano.

Initial philosophy of crypto is great. But it's not yet achieved. To save existing
currencies from being destroyed, don't invest. Use them to buy stuff. If you have a
online store, accept currencies like monero instead of HODLing it.

I hope one day above challenges will be solved and crypto will be a real currency.